---
title: "Portfolio"
---

About Me
 I started working in libraries twenty years ago in the Midwest. I had just gotten out of college, where I had done a small ethnographic and card sorting study on language and gender bias. I was also teaching music lessons at the time at the Salvation Army and privately. I enjoyed teaching and working closely in communities to learn and understand what is lacking to combat fair representation and what they needed to learn. I thought libraries could offer the same satisfaction because of their ability to offer knowledge on a large scale and their roles in the community. However, I soon learned that what makes up the community and knowledge is subjective due to the parent organization's mission and values. As a result, I moved to several different systems in the area. Still, I found the same struggles when creating an environment that promoted equality and knowledge.
      After realizing that my views of equality differed from the libraries I worked for, I focused my interest elsewhere.  I discovered Women and Coding groups that offer coding classes and learning environments for women and underrepresented people in the technology sector. This experience inspired me to go back to college to attain my master's degree in Library Sciences, hoping that what I learned outside of a library environment could influence programming and ethical beliefs towards patrons and coworkers.
        The competencies I present in this portfolio represent what I have learned in the San Jose State University's Masters of Library and Information Science Program. My background has also influenced these competencies in the library science field.   
    Please feel free to explore each competency on the left and comment or connect with me if you have any questions. 
