    Ethics is what holds an organization together, like a linchpin. As librarians and information professionals’, we can educate and provide people with vast amounts of knowledge, but without ethics that focus on the people's needs, the need for information can fall apart. 

     Information professionals' have an advantage in assuring that an ethical information environment can occur within our professional organizations but not using these resources with sincerity and integrity can cause an organization to fall apart. The American Library Association, ALA, and the Association for Information Science and Technology, asis&t, are two organizations that offer ethics values libraries use. They both focus on the user's wants and needs by acknowledging the individuality of each user's information needs by relying on the importance of the user's experience while focusing on privacy rights and being respectful to all beliefs. 

     The American Library Association's ALA code of ethics was first adopted in 1939 and has changed several times. These ethical values are a living document that can show how the ALA has addressed the changing environment of ethics in information. The ALA Code of ethics focuses on access for everyone and all beliefs while adhering to privacy rights and users' and creators' property rights. The ALA Code of ethics promises an unbiased learning environment by offering access to all information no matter what personal convictions the information seeker or giver has and not being influenced by others or themselves within their dealings with the public and other information professionals. Lastly, it is imperative for librarians to foster growth within themselves and others regarding information sharing and seeking while respecting each other (Professional Ethics, 2021).

    The Association for Information Science and Technology, asis&t, focuses on research within the science and information field. Asis&t's Professional Guidelines acknowledge the influence that researchers in science and other fields have on different communities and the need for voices to speak within these communities. Equity, diversity, and inclusion are prevalent within their research in science and technology. This organization does this by focusing on science and research that crosses all studies in the academic research realm and understanding the influences that cross over within different fields of science by sharing this information in journals and other forms of scholarly communications such as conferences. Reducing the financial barriers of access to information is another principle that this organization follows. By doing this, information can be shared widely and freely ("ASIS&T Professional Guidelines - Association for Information Science and Technology | ASIS&T," 2021).

     Both organizations focus on the importance of ethics for the benefit of their users, but sometimes issues do occur. For instance, in Algorithms of Oppression,  Safiya Umoja Noble experiments on a library database called ArtStor by searching for black history. The database retrieved results of white and European artists (Noble, 2018). Another example from the book Automating Inequality, where the author, Virginia Eubanks,  recounts a situation in Indiana where an experiment to privatize and automate the State Welfare System occurred. The state used librarians to promote and assist users of the system when it became too much of a state's burden. Librarians filled out private information forms and trained volunteers to do the same for those needing aid (Eubanks, 2018). These two examples exhibit failings of ethics shared by both organizations regarding inclusion for users and information professionals and creators and recognizing influences from outside organizations and privacy rights.

Evidence

      In my professional experience I have been troubled by the lack of ethics in practice.  I have witnessed a library administration create library policy around their experiences and not the users. Under their direction, instead of creating programming for children, we kicked them out of the library for being noisy. Notes describing the personal attributes of users were allowed on library accounts. Policy creation did not reflect or support how the community used the library based on the fine collection and computer usage. At another system that I worked for, they refused to add BIPOC culture and experiences to the collection because users would not appreciate it.  

     At this time in my career, I was only aware of the American Library Association, ALA, ethical guidelines. I relied on my high school and college education that focused on the need for equities in communities to allow everyone to learn. Unfortunately, without knowing how to use the ethical guidelines provided by professional organizations appropriately, these work environments became untenable to me, and libraries became toxic for users and employees. For example, a user once pointed out that these policies made them feel their relative's fight against slavery was wasted when they attempted to use the library.

     In my education here at SJSU, I have focused on the many aspects of ethics and how to use it in programming, research, policy development, and management to use ethics as a linchpin, which my evidence represents.

      When looking at my previous experience observing leadership in libraries, I realized that the concept of neutrality offered by the ALA code of ethics emphasizes the importance of respecting diversity of users and coworkers as well as looking to outside resources when creating policy to assure that the user’s views are represented could have been as asset in some of the situations. For my professional synthesis presented in INFO204.  I used the ALA's definition of neutrality to reflect on my library experience and how ethical violations would not have occurred if neutrality could influence policy decisions and how I intend to use it in a library environment.

     For my second piece of evidence, I look at Harvard's open data policy and privacy rights from a discussion in Big Data 246 and how the ALA and Asis& t focus on privacy as a right to users when accessing materials and how this information is stored. Privacy rights interested me because of the ethical shortcomings of one library that I worked at, allowing information such as personal characteristics  and financial issues of users to be available on library accounts.  

     The third evidence comes from the research 285 course where I focused on researching computer engineers highlighting the ethical issues in their profession and how Asis&t and the ALA ethical guidelines will help influence and form the research project that I propose, and point out that some of the ethical issues that the technology industries have could be positively influenced by some information professional’s ethical organizations.   

Conclusion 

        Ethical values are the linchpin of an information professional's ability to find and assess information. The failings that I have noted are examples of what happens when ethical values are not considered when creating library policies and programs. By practicing and identifying ethics regularly and focusing on the individual's rights, ethical issues can be avoided and shared within other communities to prevent this failure. The evidence presented shows how information science ethics can positively influence management, technology, and research in the library field. The evidence also illustrates why it is crucial to practice and use these ethical values, which I hope I can do in the future by applying privacy, neutrality, and other ethical principles when creating policy and serving the community's information needs.

 

References

ASIS&T Professional Guidelines - Association for Information Science and Technology | ASIS&T. Association for Information Science and Technology | ASIS&T. (2021). Retrieved 12 August 2021, from https://www.asist.org/about/asist-professional-guidelines/.

Eubanks, V. (2018). Automating inequality: how high-tech tools profile, police, and punish the poor (First edition.). St. Martin's Press.    

Noble, S. (2018). Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism. New York:New York University Press.

Professional Ethics. Tools, Publications & Resources. (2021). Retrieved 12 August 2021, from https://www.ala.org/tools/ethics.

